.TH ACL_DELETE_DEF_FILE 3
.SH NAME
acl_delete_def_file \- delete the default ACL for a named directory
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B #include <sys/acl.h>
.PP
.B int acl_delete_def_file(const char *path);
.SH DESCRIPTION
Deletes the default ACL associated with the directory specified in \f2path\fP.
The effective UID of the process must match the owner of the directory
or the process must have appropriate privilege to delete the
default ACL from
\f2path_p\fP.
If capabilities are not enabled, only the superuser can delete the
default ACL from a directory not owned by the effective UID.
If
.B _POSIX_CAP
is in effect, then the appropriate capability shall include CAP_FOWNER.
In addition, if
.B _POSIX_MAC
is in effect, then the process must have MAC write access to
the directory.
.P
If the argument
\f2path\fP
is not a directory, then the function fails.
.SH RETURN VALUES
.I acl_delete_def_file
returns 0 if successful, -1 otherwise.
.SH ERRORS
.TP 16
EACCESS
Search permission is denied for a component
of the path prefix or the object exists and the process does not have
appropriate access rights.
.TP 16
ENAMETOOLONG
The length of the pathname argument is greater than PATH_MAX, or some
component of it is greater than NAME_MAX.
.TP 16
ENOENT
The directory does not exist or \f2path\fP points to an empty string.
.TP 16
ENOTDIR
\f2path\fP is not a directory.
.TP 16
EPERM
The process does not have appropriate privilege to
perform the operation to delete the default ACL.
.TP 16
EROFS
This function requires modification of a file system which is currently
read-only.
