.TH xfs_bmap 8
.SH NAME
xfs_bmap \- print block mapping for an XFS file
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
\f3xfs_bmap\f1 [ \f3\-a\f1 ] [ \f3\-l\f1 ] [ \f3\-d\f1 ] [ \f3\-n \f2nnn\f1 ] file ...
.fi
.SH DESCRIPTION
.I xfs_bmap
prints the map of disk blocks used by files in an XFS filesystem.
The map lists each \f2extent\fP used by the file, as well as regions
in the file that do not have any corresponding blocks (\f2hole\f1s).
Each line of the listings takes the following form:

.Ex
\f2extent\f1\f7: [\f1\f2startoffset\f1\f7..\f1\f2endoffset\f1\f7]: \c
\f1\f2startblock\f1\f7..\f1\f2endblock\f1
.Ee

Holes are marked by replacing the \f2startblock..endblock\f1 with \f2hole\fP.
All the file offsets and disk blocks are in units of 512-byte blocks,
no matter what the filesystem's block size is.
.PP
If portions of the file have been migrated offline by
a DMAPI application, a DMAPI read event will be generated to
bring those portions back online before the disk block map is
printed.  However if the \f3-d\f1 option is used, no DMAPI read event
will be generated for a DMAPI file and offline portions will be reported as holes.
.PP
If the \f3-l\f1 option is used, then

.Ex
\f1\f2<nblocks>\f1\f7 \f1\f2blocks\f1\f7
.Ee

will be appended to each line.  \f1\f2Nblocks\f1\f7 is the length
of the extent described on the line in units of 512-byte blocks.
.PP
If the \f3\-a\f1 option is given, information about the file's
attribute fork is printed instead of the default data fork.
.PP
If the \f3\-n \f2nnn\f1 option is given, \f3xfs_bmap\f1 obtains the extent
list of the file in groups of \f2nnn\f1 extents.
In the absence of \f3\-n\f1, \f3xfs_bmap\f1 queries the system for
the number of extents in the file and uses that value to compute 
the group size.
.SH DIAGNOSTICS
.TP 10
\f7fcntl(F_GETBMAPX) \f1\f2filename\f1\f7: Invalid argument\f1
The file \f2filename\f1 is not in an XFS filesystem.
.SH SEE ALSO
fcntl(2),
lvm(8).

