.TH xfs_logprint 8
.SH NAME
xfs_logprint \- print the log of an XFS filesystem
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
\f3xfs_logprint\f1 [ options ] device-name
\f3xfs_logprint \-f\f1 [ options ] filename
.fi
.SH DESCRIPTION
.I xfs_logprint
prints the log of an XFS filesystem (see
.IR xfs (5)).
The
.I device-name
argument is the pathname of the partition or logical volume
containing the filesystem.
The contents of the filesystem remain undisturbed.
There are two major modes of operation in
.IR xfs_logprint .
.PP
One mode is better for filesystem operation debugging.
It is called the transactional view and is enabled through the \f3\-t\f1
option.
The transactional view prints only the portion of the log that
pertains to recovery.
In other words, it prints out complete transactions between the tail
and the head.
This view tries to display each transaction without
regard to how they are split across log records.
.PP
The second mode starts printing out information from the beginning of the log.
Some error blocks might print out in the beginning because the last log
record usually overlaps the oldest log record.
A message is
printed when the physical end of the log is reached and when the
logical end of the log is reached.
A log record view is displayed
one record at a time.
Transactions that span log records may not be
decoded fully.
.PP
Common options are:
.TP
\f3\-b\f1
Extract and print buffer information.
Only used in transactional view.
.TP
\f3\-D\f1
Don't decode anything;
just print data.
.TP
\f3\-e\f1
Exit when an error is found in the log.
Normally,
.I xfs_logprint
tries to continue and unwind from bad logs.
However, sometimes it just dies in bad ways.
Using this option prevents core dumps.
.TP
\f3\-f\f1
The log is a file.
.TP
\f3\-i\f1
Extract and print inode information.
Only used in transactional view.
.TP
\f3\-q\f1
Extract and print quota information.
Only used in transactional view.
.TP
\f3\-n\f1
Don't try and interpret log data;
just interpret log header information.
.TP
\f3\-o\f1
Also print buffer data in hex.
Normally, buffer data is just decoded, so better information can be printed.
.TP
\f3\-s\f1 \f2start-block\f1
Override any notion of where to start printing.
.TP
\f3\-t\f1
Print out the transactional view.
.SH SEE ALSO
mkfs.xfs(8),
mount(8).
