.TH xfsdq 8
.SH NAME
xfsdq, xfsrq \- XFS dump and restore quota
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
\f3xfsdq\f1 [ \f3\-g\f1|\f3-u\f1 ] filesystem
\f3xfsrq\f1 [ \f3\-g\f1|\f3-u\f1 ] xfsdump_quotas
.fi
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B xfsdq
outputs a summary of the disk quotas for the specified XFS filesystem
for either all users declared in the local
.I /etc/passwd
file, or all groups declared in the local
.I /etc/group
file.
.PP
The output format exactly matches that produced by the IRIX
.I repquota
command, given the
.B \-e
option.
The format contains two lines for each user/group - the
first line contains the filesystem device file, the second
contains the uid/gid, block soft limit, block hard limit,
inode soft limit, and finally the inode hard limit (in that
order).
.PP
.B xfsdump
runs
.B xfsdq
on those filesystems with quota enabled, and redirects the
output (from standard output stream) to a file which is
subsequently stored on the dump device.
For user quota, this file is named
.IR xfsdump_quotas ,
for group quota it is named
.IR xfsdump_quotas_group .
Thus,
the primary purpose of
.B xfsdq
is to maintain this dump file format between IRIX and Linux,
such that
.B xfsdump
backups remain interchangable.
.PP
.B xfsrq
is a simple wrapper around
.BR setquota (8)
which automates the restoration of quota information
using this
.I xfsdump_quotas
file.
.PP
The
.B \-u
(user) option specifies user quota should be reported.
This is the default.
.PP
The
.B \-g
(group) option specifies that group quota are to be reported.
.PP
The
.I filesystem
argument should be the filesystem mount point, and not the device.
.SH RESTORE
In order to restore quota information using the output from
.BR xfsdq ,
one must first restore a copy of the
.I xfsdump_quotas
file from the dump device.
.PP
On Linux, user quota can then be restored using:
.PP
.nf
        # xfsrq -u xfsdump_quotas
.fi
.PP
On IRIX, the equivalent command is:
.PP
.nf
        # edquota -i xfsdump_quotas
.fi
.SH NOTES
Only user quota are supported by both Linux and IRIX.
Group quota are not supported on IRIX and project quota
are not supported on Linux.
.PP
The soft and hard block limits reported by
.B xfsdq
are in units of 512 bytes for compatibility with IRIX.
The Linux quota utilities, e.g.
.BR quota (1)
and
.BR repquota (8),
report blocks in units of 1024 bytes -
.B xfsrq
performs the necessary conversions automatically.
.SH FILES
.PD 0
.TP 20
.B /etc/mtab
default filesystems
.TP
.B /etc/passwd
default set of users
.TP
.B /etc/passwd
default set of groups
.SH SEE ALSO
quota(1),
repquota(8),
setquota(8),
xfsdump(8),
xfs(5).
